---
imgSrc: old-window.jpg
imgAlt: a website about typography
layout: post
meta: To understand why let and const were added, it’s probably best to look at an example of when using var can get tricky.
main-class: main--blog
title: When to use const and let · Daniel Munoz
header: When to use let and const
---
There are two 'new' ways to declare variables in JavaScript: let and const.

 To understand why let and const were added, it’s probably best to look at an example of when using var can get tricky.

Before running this code what do you think <span class="nx">cold</span> would return.

```js
function getJacket (isCold) {
  if (isCold) {
    var cold = 'Grab a jacket!';
  } else {
    var hot = 'It’s a shorts kind of day.';
    console.log('cold is: ', cold);
  }
}

getJacket(false);
```

(when this code is executed <span class="nx">cold</span> will be undefined);
## Hoisting

Hoisting is a result of how JavaScript is read by your browser. Before any JavaScript code is executed, all variables are "hoisted", which means they're raised to the top of the function scope. So at run-time, the getJacket() function actually looks more like this…

```js
function getJacket (isCold) {
  var cold, hot;
  if (isCold) {
    cold = 'Grab a hoodie!';
  } else {
    hot = 'It’s a shorts kind of day.';
    console.log('cold is: ', cold);
  }
}

getJacket(false);
```
(when this code is executed <span class="nx">cold</span> will be undefined)

## let and const

Variables declared with let and const stop this specific issue of hoisting because they’re scoped to the block, not to the function. Previously, when you used var, variables were either scoped globally or locally to an entire function scope.

If a variable is declared using let or const inside a block of code (inside this { }), then the variable is stuck in what is known as the 'temporal dead zone' until the variable’s declaration is processed. This behavior prevents variables from being accessed only until after they’ve been declared.

Before running this code what do you think <span class="nx">cold</span> would return.

```js
function getJacket (isCold) {
  if (isCold) {
    let cold = 'Grab a jacket!';
  } else {
    let hot = 'It’s a shorts kind of day.';
    console.log('cold is: ', cold);
  }
}

getJacket(false);
```
(when this code is executed <span class="nx">cold</span> would throw a reference error)

## Rules for using let and const

* Variables declared with let can be reassigned, but can’t be redeclared in the same scope.

* Variables declared with const must be assigned an initial value, but can’t be redeclared in the same scope, and can’t be reassigned.

## Use cases
The big question is when should you use let and const? The general rule of thumb is as follows:

* use let when you plan to reassign new values to a variable, and
* use const when you don’t plan on reassigning new values to a variable.

I think you should declare variables that won't change with const because it'll make your code easier to read since you know the variable won't change throughout your program. If you need to update a variable or change it, then use let.

## What about var?
Is there any reason to use var anymore? Maybe.

There are some arguments that can be made for using var in situations where you want to globally define variables, but this is often considered bad practice and should be avoided. I suggest using let and const in place of var, but its up to you.